This project is geared toward advancing phage therapy efficacy through the strategic engineering of a crucial phage protein to overcome host bacterial resistance. Specifically, our focus lies in the customization of the MS2 phage to surmount resistance mechanisms in its host bacterium, Escherichia coli (E. coli). The MS2 phage executes lysis in E. coli by expressing its lysis protein "L". However, a challenge arises as the proper processing of this lysis protein is contingent upon the bacterial chaperone protein DnaJ. E. coli, in response, can mutate its DnaJ protein, impeding proper processing and interfering with the expression of the L protein, thereby rendering the phage less effective. 
To address this issue, our objective is to engineer the L protein, freeing it from dependency on DnaJ for proper processing. For this purpose, we will create L protein mutants, and we plan to leverage the Nuclera system to investigate them for a) proper protein folding and b) interaction with wild-type DnaJ and some common mutants. The selection of mutations will be informed by existing literature and protein structure prediction software, e.g., AlphaFold. All mutants demonstrating the desired traits – proper folding and minimal interaction with DnaJ – will then be prioritized for testing in E. coli using a plaque assay and metabolic monitoring. For these assays, the MS2 genome will be synthesized by Twist, including smaller fragments containing the engineered L mutations. At approximately 3600 bp this is around a $3k Twist order, and we hope to find a mechanism to distribute to the remote labs under the Twist MTA rather than needing to distribute material from MIT. Through cloning, these mutations will be incorporated into the MS2 genome, and the corresponding phages will be produced in a phage-resistant E. coli strain such as XL1 Blue or C3000. Finally, to assess the practical effectiveness of the engineered phages, E. coli cultures will be infected and grown continuously for 72 hours at three distinct temperatures: 30 °C, 37 °C, and 42 °C. The plaque assay will be performed at different time points, 0 hours (without prior E. coli incubation), 24 hours, 48 hours, and 72 hours, to evaluate the phages' ability to combat bacterial resistance over the specified duration. Some mechanisms for assessing partial phage infectivity through metabolism monitoring are also under consideration, which can involve the Opentrons to automate the assays. This comprehensive approach integrates molecular engineering, protein analysis, genomic synthesis, and functional testing, with the ultimate goal of enhancing the therapeutic potential of phages in combating antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections.
